Towards v3 (#48)
gap-actions/setup-gap: README.md

# setup-gap V3

This GitHub action downloads and prepares an instance of GAP.
It is intended to be used by the Continuous Integration (CI) action of a GAP
package, that is by an action which runs a package's test suite.

## Supported OSes

This action can be run on macOS, Ubuntu and Windows (when preceded by the `setup-cygwin` action).

## Usage

The action `setup-gap` has to be called by the workflow of a GAP
package.
By default it
- downloads and compiles the latest release of GAP, and
- compiles the packages `io`, `json` and `profiling`

Its behaviour can be customized via the inputs below.

### Inputs

All of the following inputs are optional.

- `gap-version`:

>    - The gap version or branch to build. You may specify "latest" for the latest release, or "default" for the default branch.

Reviewer: Based on your examples it seems one can also specify v4.11.1 (so tags?) or 4 and v4.10 (not tags). Could this be explained please?

Also "default branch" is not clear --presumably this means "GAP development version built from the default branch of the GAP repository"

I guess this hints at a translation key for people upgrading: "master" should become "default" and "stable-4.X" becomes "4.X" (or it stays, if branch names are supported? But better to suggest "4.X")

   - default: `latest`
- `repository`
   - The GitHub repository from which to clone GAP.
   - default: `'gap-system/gap'`
- `configflags`:
   - Arguments to pass to the GAP configure script.
   - default: `''`
- `gap-pkgs-to-build`:
   - A space-separated list of the GAP packages to build.
   - default: `'io json profiling'`

### What's new in v3
Version v3 contains many changes compared to version v2. Simply replacing `setup-gap@v2` by `setup-gap@v3` in an existing workflow

> will almost surely not work.

Reviewer: That sounds rather dark and ominous, without being helpful: we should at least give a hint what *needs* to be changed, and what *ought* to be changed (e.g replacing `stable-v4.X` by ... ugh... `4.X`? Or `v4.X`? Which one is allowed? If both: is there any difference?)

Author: I've tried to make it sound less disastrous, and indeed suggested changing branches by releases.

#### Changes to inputs:
 - The `GAPBRANCH` input has been replaced by `gap-version`, which accepts version numbers, branch names, or either `default` or `latest`.

>  - The input `GAP_PKGS_TO_CLONE` has been removed. This should now be done by the user in a separate step in the workflow.

Reviewer: Perhaps we can have an example for doing that somewhere in this document? I started writing a suggestion in my computer late last night but now just have my phone...

 - The input `GAP_PKGS_TO_BUILD` has been renamed to `gap-pkgs-to-build`. It can only be used to build packages distributed with GAP.
   In addition to `IO` and `profiling`, the package `json` is now also built by default.
 - The inputs `HPCGAP` and `ABI` have been removed, and support for both HPC-GAP and 32-bit builds has been removed.
 - The (previously undocumented) input `CONFIGFLAGS` has been renamed to `configflags`.
 - The input `GAP_BOOTSTRAP` has been removed. GAP will always come with all distributed packages.
 - An input `repository` has been added, which allows building a version of GAP hosted on a repository different from `gap-system/gap`.

#### Changes to functionality:
 - There is no longer a separate branch for running this action on Windows. This action should work on Windows, assuming it is
   preceded by version v2 or later of [setup-cygwin](https://github.com/gap-actions/setup-gap).

>  - The installation location of GAP is added to the variable `GAPROOT`, which can be used in subsequent steps in the workflow.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - The installation location of GAP is stored in the environment variable `GAPROOT`, which can be used in subsequent steps in the workflow.
```

# setup-gap v3

This GitHub action downloads and prepares an instance of GAP.
It is intended to be used by the Continuous Integration (CI) action of a GAP
package, that is by an action which runs a package's test suite.

## Supported OSes

This action can be run on macOS, Ubuntu and Windows (when preceded by the `setup-cygwin` action).

## Usage

The action `setup-gap` has to be called by the workflow of a GAP
package.
By default it
- downloads and compiles the latest release of GAP, and
- compiles the packages `io`, `json` and `profiling`

Its behaviour can be customized via the inputs below.

### Inputs

All of the following inputs are optional.

- `gap-version`:
   - The gap version or branch to build. You may specify "latest" for the latest release, or "default" for the default branch.
     see "Changes to inputs" under "What's new in v3" for more details.
   - default: `latest`
- `repository`
   - The GitHub repository from which to clone GAP.
   - default: `'gap-system/gap'`
- `configflags`:
   - Arguments to pass to the GAP configure script.
   - default: `''`
- `gap-pkgs-to-build`:
   - A space-separated list of the GAP packages to build.

>    - default: `'io json profiling'`

Author: It's needed for the `release-pkg` action.

I'm fine with opening a similar PR to `release-pkg` and removing this input here before releasing v3?

 - The (previously undocumented) input `CONFIGFLAGS` has been renamed to `configflags`.
 - The input `GAP_BOOTSTRAP` has been removed. GAP will always come with all distributed packages.
 - An input `repository` has been added, which allows building a version of GAP hosted on a repository different from `gap-system/gap`.

#### Changes to functionality:
 - There is no longer a separate branch for running this action on Windows. This action should work on Windows, assuming it is
   preceded by version v2 or later of [setup-cygwin](https://github.com/gap-actions/setup-gap).
 - The installation location of GAP is stored in the environment variable `GAPROOT`, which can be used in subsequent steps in the workflow.
 - The GAP executable is added to `PATH`, thus GAP can now always be started by calling `gap`.

### Example

The following is a minimal example to run this action.

```yaml
name: CI

on:
  push:
  pull_request:

jobs:
  # The CI test job
  test:
    name: CI test
    runs-on: ubuntu-latest

    steps:
      - uses: actions/checkout@v5
      - uses: gap-actions/setup-gap@v3
      # ... additional steps using GAP will usually follow here
```

> A more extensive example:

Author: I've added this as part of the second example now: one step using `git clone` in `$HOME/.gap/pkg`, a second using PackageManager.
